---
topics:
    - subharmonic functions
---

<problem>

1. Define _upper-semicontinuous_ for functions $\func{f}{\C}{\pco{-\infty,\infty}}$.
2. Define what it means for such an upper-semicontinuous function to be _subharmonic_.
3. Prove or refute (with a counterexample) each of the following:
    - The pointwise supremum of a bounded family of subharmonic functions is subharmonic.
    - The pointwise infimum of a family of subharmonic functions is subharmonic.
4. Let $A\p{z}$ be a $2 \times 2$ matrix-valued holomorphic function (i.e., the entries are holomorphic). Show that

    $$
    z \mapsto \log\p{\norm{A\p{z}}}
    \quad\text{ is subharmonic}
    $$

    where $\norm{A\p{z}}$ is the norm as an operator on the Hilbert space $\C^2$.

</problem>

<solution>

1. $f$ is upper-semicontinuous if $\set{z \mid f\p{z} < a}$ is open for any $a \in \R$.

2. An upper-semicontinuous function $\func{u}{\C}{\pco{-\infty, \infty}}$ is subharmonic if

    $$
    u\p{z}
        \leq \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} u\p{z + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta
    $$

    for any $z \in \C$ and $r > 0$.

3. The first one is true as long as the supremum is upper-semicontinuous. Let $\set{u_\alpha}_\alpha$ be such a family and denote the pointwise supremum by $u$.

    Given $z \in \C$, there exists a sequence $\set{u_n}_n$ in this family such that $u_n\p{z} \to u\p{z}$. Moreover, if $M$ is a bound for the family, then $M + u_\alpha \geq 0$ for any $\alpha$, so we may apply Fatou's lemma:

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        M + u\p{z}
            &= \limsup_{n\to\infty}\, \p{M + u_n\p{z}} \\
            &\leq \limsup_{n\to\infty} \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \p{M + u_n\p{z + re^{i\theta}}} \,\diff\theta \\
            &\leq \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \limsup_{n\to\infty}\, \p{M + u_n\p{z + re^{i\theta}}} \,\diff\theta \\
            &\leq \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} M + u\p{z + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta \\
            &= M + \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} u\p{z + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta \\
        \implies
        u\p{z}
            &\leq \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} u\p{z + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta,
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    so $u$ is subharmonic.

    The second one is false: consider $u_a\p{z} = \Re\p{e^{az}}$ indexed by $a \in \C$. Then $\inf_a u_a\p{z} = -\infty$ for $z \neq 0$, but $u_a\p{0} = 1$ for all $a \in \C$. Then if $u = \inf_a u_a$,

    $$
    1
        = u\p{z}
        \geq -\infty
        = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} u\p{z + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta,
    $$

    so $u$ is not subharmonic.

4. Notice that because $\log{x}$ is continuous,

    $$
    \log\p{\norm{A\p{z}}}
        = \sup_{\norm{w} = 1}\, \log\p{\norm{A\p{z}w}}
        = \sup_{\norm{w} = \norm{\zeta} = 1}\, \log\,\abs{\inner{A\p{z}w, \zeta}}
    $$

    Since $A\p{z}$ is holomorphic, we see that $\inner{A\p{z}w, \zeta}$ is a composition of holomorphic functions, hence holomorphic. Thus, $z \mapsto \log\p{\norm{A\p{z}}}$ is the logarithm of the absolute value of an analytic function, hence subharmonic.

</solution>
