---
topics:
    - weak convergence
---

<problem>

If $X$ is a compact metric space, we denote by $\mathcal{P}\p{X}$ the set of positive BOrel measures $\mu$ on $X$ with $\mu\p{X} = 1$.

1. Let $\func{\phi}{X}{\br{0,\infty}}$ be a lower-semicontinuous function on a compact metric space $X$. Show that if $\mu$ and $\mu_n$ for $n \in \N$ are in $\mathcal{P}\p{X}$ and $\mu_n \to \mu$ with respect to the weak-star topology on $\mathcal{P}\p{X}$, then

    $$
    \int \phi \,\diff\mu
        \leq \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int \phi \,\diff\mu_n.
    $$

2. Let $K \subseteq \R^d$ be a compact set. For $\mu \in \mathcal{P}\p{K}$, we define

    $$
    E\p{\mu}
        = \int_K \int_K \frac{1}{\abs{x - y}} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{y}.
    $$

    Here $\abs{z}$ denotes the Euclidean norm of $z \in \R^d$.

    Show that the function $\func{E}{\mathcal{P}\p{K}}{\br{0,\infty}}$ attains its minimum on $\mathcal{P}\p{K}$ (which could possibly be $\infty$).

</problem>

<solution>

1. Since $\phi$ is lower-semicontinuous, there exists a sequence $\set{f_n}_n$ of continuous functions on $X$ which increase pointwise to $\phi$, and so we have

    $$
    \int f_k \,\diff\mu_n
        \leq \int \phi \,\diff\mu_n
    \implies
    \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int f_k \,\diff\mu_n
        \leq \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int \phi \,\diff\mu_n.
    $$

    for all $n, k \in \N$. By Riesz representation, $\p{C\p{X}}^*$ is the space of positive Borel measures on $X$. Hence, weak-\* convergence of $\set{\mu_n}_n$ means

    $$
    \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int f_k \,\diff\mu_n
        = \int f_k \,\diff\mu,
    $$

    since each $f_k$ is continuous. Since the $f_k$ are increasing, this means that $f_1 \leq f_k$, and because $X$ is compact, $f_1$ is bounded. Hence, the $f_k$ are bounded uniformly from below, so we may apply monotone convergence to get

    $$
    \lim_{k\to\infty} \int f_k \,\diff\mu
        = \int \phi \,\diff\mu.
    $$

    Hence,

    $$
    \int \phi \,\diff\mu
        \leq \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int \phi \,\diff\mu_n.
    $$

2. Let $I = \inf_{\mathcal{P}\p{K}} E$. If $I = \infty$, then any measure on $\mathcal{P}\p{K}$ is a minimizer, e.g., a normalized Lebesgue measure will work. Otherwise, let $\set{\mu_n}_n \subseteq \mathcal{P}\p{K}$ be a sequence such that $E\p{\mu_n} \to I$ as $n \to \infty$. By Banach-Alaoglu (the $\mu_n$ all hae norm $1$), there exists a measure $\mu \in \mathcal{P}\p{K}$ such that, passing to a subsequence if necessary, $\mu_n \to \mu$ weakly-\*.

    We claim that $\mu_n \otimes \mu_n \to \mu \otimes \mu$ weakly-\* in $\p{C\p{K \times K}}^*$ as well. Indeed, by Stone-Weierstrass, the set

    $$
    A = \set{\sum_{k=1}^n c_kf_k\p{x}g_k\p{x} \st n \in \N,\ c_k \in \R,\ f_k, g_k \in C\p{K}}
    $$

    is uniformly dense in $C\p{K \times K}$. Moreover,

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_K \int_K \sum_{k=1}^N c_k f_k\p{x} g_k\p{y} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x} \,\diff\mu_n\p{y}
            &= \lim_{n\to\infty} \sum_{k=1}^N c_k \p{\int_K f_k\p{x} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x}} \p{\int_K g_k\p{y} \,\diff\mu_n\p{y}} \\
            &= \sum_{k=1}^N \sum_{k=1}^N c_k \p{\int_K f_k\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{x}} \p{\int_K g_k\p{y} \,\diff\mu\p{y}} \\
            &= \int_K \int_K \sum_{k=1}^N c_k f_k\p{x} g_k\p{y} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{y},
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    so $\mu_n \otimes \mu_n \to \mu \otimes \mu$ on a dense set, hence on all of $C\p{K \times K}$. Finally, observe that $\frac{1}{\abs{x - y}}$ is a lower-semicontinuous function on $K \times K$: if $x \neq y$, then it is continuous there, and otherwise, if $x = y$, then the function tends to $\infty$ when approaching these points. Thus, by (1),

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        E\p{\mu}
            &= \int_K \int_K \frac{1}{\abs{x - y}} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{y} \\
            &\leq \liminf_{n\to\infty} \int_K \int_K \frac{1}{\abs{x - y}} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x} \,\diff\mu_n\p{y} \\
            &= \liminf_{n\to\infty} E\p{\mu_n} \\
            &= I,
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    so $\mu$ is a minimizer.

</solution>
