---
topics:
    - Banach spaces
---

<problem>

Consider the Banach space $\ell^1$ consisting of all sequences $u = \set{x_i}_i$ in $\R$ ()i.e., $x_i \in \R$ for $i \in \N$) with

$$
\norm{u}_{L^1} = \sum_{i=1}^\infty \abs{x_i} < \infty
$$

and the Banach space $\ell^\infty$ consisting of all sequences $v = \set{y_i}_i$ in $\R$ with

$$
\norm{v}_{L^\infty} = \sup_{i \in \N} \,\abs{y_i} < \infty.
$$

There is a well-defined dual pairing between $\ell^1$ and $\ell^\infty$ given by

$$
\inner{u, v} = \sum_{i=1}^\infty x_iy_i
$$

for $u = \set{x_i}_i \in \ell^1$ and $v = \set{y_i}_i \in \ell^\infty$. With this dual pairing, $\ell^\infty = \p{\ell^1}^*$ is the dual space of $\ell^1$.

1. Show that there exists no sequence $\set{u_n}_n$ in $\ell^1$ such that (i) $\norm{u_n}_1 \geq 1$ for all $n \in \N$ and (ii) $\inner{u_n, v} \to 0$ for each $v \in \ell^\infty$.
2. Show that every weakly convergence sequence $\set{u_n}_n$ in $\ell^1$ converges in the norm topology of $\ell^1$.

</problem>

<solution>

1. By normalizing, we will assume without loss of generality that $\norm{u_n}_1 = 1$ for all $n \geq 1$. Observe that if $v = e_k$, which is the sequence with a $1$ in the $k$-th coordinate and $0$ everywhere else, then such a sequence satisfies $u_n\p{k} \to 0$ as $n \to \infty$ for all $k$, i.e., $u_n \to 0$ pointwise. Intuitively, if we view the sequence $u_n\p{k}$ as a grid, then most the mass should lie in the diagonal.

    Fix $\epsilon > 0$. Since $u_1 \in \ell^1$, there exists $N_1 \in \N$ such that

    $$
    \sum_{k=N_1}^\infty \abs{u_1\p{k}} \leq \epsilon.
    $$

    Similarly, because $u_n\p{1}, \ldots, u_n\p{N_1}$ all tend to $0$ as $n \to \infty$, there exists $M_1 \in \N$ such that

    $$
    \sum_{k=1}^{N_1-1} \abs{u_{M_1}\p{k}} \leq \epsilon.
    $$

    Inductively pick $N_i, M_i$ so that $N_i < N_{i+1}$, $M_i < M_{i+1}$,

    $$
    \sum_{k=N_i}^\infty \abs{u_{M_{i-1}}\p{k}} \leq \epsilon
    \quad\text{and}\quad
    \sum_{k=1}^{N_i-1} \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} \leq \epsilon,
    $$

    which gives

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        \sum_{k=N_i}^{N_{i+1}-1} \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}}
            &= \norm{u_{M_i}}_1 - \sum_{k=1}^{N_i-1} \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} - \sum_{k=N_{i+1}}^\infty \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} \\
            &\geq 1 - 2\epsilon,
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    i.e., $N_i$ and $M_i$ are chosen so that most of the mass of $u_{M_i}$ is concentrated in $N_i \leq k < N_{i+1}$.

    Define $v\p{k} = \sgn\p{u_1\p{k}}$ for $1 \leq k < N_1$, and $v\p{k} = \sgn\p{u_{M_{i-1}}\p{k}}$ for $N_{i-1} \leq k < N_i$, for $i \geq 2$. Then

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        \abs{\inner{u_{M_i}, v}}
            &= \abs{\sum_{k=1}^{N_i-1} u_{M_i}\p{k} v\p{k} + \sum_{k=N_i}^{N_{i+1}-1} \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} + \sum_{k=N_{i+1}}^\infty u_{M_i}\p{k}v\p{k}} \\
            &\geq \sum_{k=N_i}^{N_{i+1}-1} \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} - \abs{\sum_{k=1}^{N_i-1} u_{M_i}\p{k} v\p{k} + \sum_{k=N_{i+1}}^\infty u_{M_i}\p{k}v\p{k}} \\
            &\geq \p{1 - 2\epsilon} - \sum_{k=1}^{N_i-1} \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} - \sum_{k=N_{i+1}}^\infty \abs{u_{M_i}\p{k}} \\
            &\geq 1 - 4\epsilon.
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    Thus, if we set $\epsilon < \frac{1}{4}$, then $\inner{u_n, v}$ cannot converge to $0$.

2. Suppose otherwise, and that there is a sequence $\set{u_n}_n \subseteq \ell^1$ which converges weakly to some $u \in \ell^1$ but does not converge in the norm topology. Then there exists some $\epsilon > 0$ such that

    $$
    \norm{u_n - u}_{\ell^1} \geq \epsilon
    \implies \norm{\frac{u_n - u}{\epsilon}} \geq 1.
    $$

    But by weak convergence,

    $$
    \inner{\frac{u_n - u}{\epsilon}, v}
        \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} 0,
    $$

    which contradicts (1). Hence, no such sequence could have existed to begin with.

</solution>
