---
topics:
    - Hilbert spaces
---

<problem>

Given a Hilbert space $\mathcal{H}$, let $\set{a_n}_{n\geq1} \subseteq \mathcal{H}$ be a sequence with $\norm{a_n} = 1$ for all $n \geq 1$. Recall that the closed convex hull of $\set{a_n}_{n\geq1}$ is the closure of the set of all convex combinations of elements in $\set{a_n}_n$.

1. Show that if $\set{a_n}_n$ spans $\mathcal{H}$ linearly (i.e., any $x \in \mathcal{H}$ is of the form $\sum_{k=1}^m c_k a_{n_k}$, for some $m$ and $c_k \in \C$), then $\mathcal{H}$ is finite dimensional.
2. Show that if $\inner{a_n, \xi} \to 0$ for all $\xi \in \mathcal{H}$, then $0$ is in the closed convex hull of $\set{a_n}_n$.

</problem>

<solution>

1. $\set{a_1}$ is linearly independent and orthonormal. We now throw out all $a_n$ such that $\set{a_1, a_n}$ is linearly independent. If all that remains is $\set{a_1}$, then $\mathcal{H}$ is finite dimensional by assumption. Otherwise, after renumbering, $\set{a_1, a_2}$ is linearly independent, and by Gram-Schmidt, we may assume without loss of generality that $\set{a_1, a_2}$ is orthonormal.

    Repeating this process, we obtain $\set{a_1, \ldots, a_N}$ an orthonormal set at the $N$-th stage. If this process terminates, then $\mathcal{H} \simeq \C^N$ and we are done. Now suppose that this does not terminate, so we get an orthonormal sequence $\set{a_n}_n$ which still spans $\mathcal{H}$ linearly.

    Consider $x = \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{a_n}{2^n}$ and notice that the partial sums are Cauchy:

    $$
    \norm{\sum_{n=N}^M \frac{a_n}{2^n}}^2
        = \sum_{n=N}^M \frac{1}{4^n}
        \leq \frac{1}{4^N} \cdot \frac{1}{1 - \frac{1}{4}}
        = \frac{1}{3 \cdot 4^{N-1}} \xrightarrow{N\to\infty} 0,
    $$

    so $x \in \mathcal{H} \setminus \set{0}$. Hence, by assumption, we may express it as a finite linear combination $x = \sum_{n=1}^N c_n a_n$. But observe that

    $$
    c_k
        = \sum_{n=1}^N c_n \inner{a_n, a_k}
        = \inner{x, a_k}
        = \sum_{n=1}^\infty \frac{\inner{a_n, a_k}}{2^n}
        = \frac{1}{2^k},
    $$

    i.e., the coefficients of the finite linear combination matches up with those of the infinite one. This means that any finite linear combination cannot represent $x$, a contradiction, so $\mathcal{H}$ must have been finite dimensional to begin with.

2. Let $K$ be the closed convex hull in question. Since $K$ is closed and convex, there exists a unique $x \in K$ such that $\norm{x} = d\p{0, K}$. Since $x$ is a minimizer, for any $y \in K$, $\p{1 - \theta}y + \theta x \in K$ by convexity and so $\norm{\p{1 - \theta}y + \theta x}^2 \geq \norm{x}^2$. Expanding,

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        &\p{1 - \theta}^2\norm{y}^2 + \theta^2 \norm{x}^2 + 2\Re\inner{\p{1 - \theta} y, \theta x}
            \geq \norm{x}^2 \\
        \implies{}& 2\p{1 - \theta}\theta\Re\inner{y, x}
            \geq \p{1 - \theta^2} \norm{x}^2 - \p{1 - \theta}^2\norm{y}^2 \\
        \implies{}& 2\theta\Re\inner{y, x} \geq \p{1 + \theta}\norm{x}^2 - \p{1 - \theta}\norm{y}^2.
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    Sending $\theta \to 1$, we see $\Re\inner{y, x} \geq \norm{x}^2$. But if we let $y = a_n$, then

    $$
    \norm{x}^2 \leq \Re\inner{a_n, x} \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} 0
    $$

    by assumption, so $x = 0$.

</solution>
