---
topics:
    - subharmonic functions
    - Harnack's inequality
---

<problem>

Let $\set{f_n}_n$ be a sequence of holomorphic functions on $\D$ with the property that

$$
F\p{z} = \sum_{n=1}^\infty \abs{f_n\p{z}}^2 \leq 1
$$

for all $z \in \D$. Show that the series defining $F\p{z}$ converges uniformly on compact subsets of $\D$ and that $F$ is subharmonic.

</problem>

<solution>

Given $B\p{z, r} \subseteq \D$, we have by Cauchy-Schwarz

$$
\begin{aligned}
\abs{f_n\p{z}}^2
    &= \abs{\frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} f_n\p{z + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta}^2 \\
    &\leq \frac{1}{4\pi^2} \p{\int_0^{2\pi} \abs{f_n\p{z + re^{i\theta}}}^2 \,\diff\theta} \p{\int_0^{2\pi} \,\diff\theta} \\
    &= \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \abs{f_n\p{z + re^{i\theta}}}^2 \,\diff\theta,
\end{aligned}
$$

so $\abs{f_n}^2$ satisfies the sub-mean value property. Since $\abs{f_n}^2$ is continuous ($f_n$ is holomorphic), it follows that $\abs{f_n}^2$ is subharmonic. Thus, $F$ is the pointwise supremum of a family of subharmonic functions, so it is itself subharmonic.

It remains to show locally uniformly convergence. First, we will show that if $u$ is a continuous subharmonic function, then it satisfies a sub-Poisson representation formula on closed disks. Indeed, let $\cl{B\p{z_0, r}} \subseteq \D$ and $v$ be the solution to the Dirichlet problem on $B\p{z_0, r}$ with boundary condition $u$ so that

$$
v\p{z} \leq u\p{z} = \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \Re\p{\frac{re^{i\theta} + z - z_0}{re^{i\theta} - \p{z - z_0}}} v\p{z_0 + re^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta
$$

on $\partial B\p{z_0, r}$. By subharmonicity, this implies that $v\p{z} \leq u\p{z}$ on all of $B\p{z_0, r}$, so we get the sub-Poisson representation formula.

Let $K = \cl{B\p{0, R}}$ for $0 < R < 1$ so that $\cl{B\p{0, \frac{1 + R}{2}}} \subseteq \D$ as well. Let $R' = \frac{1 + R}{2}$. Then if $z \in K$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    v\p{z}
        &\leq \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \Re\p{\frac{R'e^{i\theta} + z}{R'e^{i\theta} - z}} v\p{R'e^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta \\
        &= \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \frac{R' - \abs{z}^2}{\abs{R'e^{i\theta} - z}^2} v\p{R'e^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta \\
        &\leq \frac{1}{2\pi} \int_0^{2\pi} \frac{\p{R'}^2 - R}{\p{R' - R}^2} v\p{R'e^{i\theta}} \,\diff\theta \\
        &\leq \frac{R' + R}{R' - R} v\p{0} \\
        &\eqqcolon M_K v\p{0}.
\end{aligned}
$$

for any non-negative subharmonic $v$. If we let $F_N = \sum_{n=1}^N \abs{f_n}^2$, then $F_N$ is subharmonic as a sum of subharmonic functions. Thus, for $N \leq M$,

$$
\abs{F_M\p{z} - F_N\p{z}}
    \leq M_K \abs{F_M\p{0} - F_N\p{0}},
$$

so $\set{F_N}_n$ is uniformly Cauchy on $K$, since the partial sums is Cauchy at $0$. Hence, $F$ converges locally uniformly, as required.

</solution>
