---
topics:
    - meromorphic functions
---

<problem>

Let $\C^* = \C \cup \set{\infty}$ be the Riemann sphere and let $\Omega = \C^* \setminus \set{0, 1}$. Let $\func{f}{\Omega}{\Omega}$ be a holomorphic function.

1. Prove that if $f$ is injective then $f\p{\Omega} = \Omega$.
2. Make a list of all such injective functions $f$.

</problem>

<solution>

First, let

$$
\phi\p{z} = \frac{z}{z - 1},
$$

which is an automorphism of $\C^*$ mapping $0 \mapsto 0$ and $1 \mapsto \infty$. Thus, if $f$ is as in the problem, then $g = \phi^{-1} \circ f \circ \phi$ is an injective holomorphic function everywhere except at $\phi^{-1}\p{0} = 0$ and $\phi^{-1}\p{1} = \infty$, i.e., $\func{g}{\C \setminus \set{0}}{\C \setminus \set{0}}$.

Since $g$ is injective, it follows that $g$ does not have an essential singularity at $\infty$. Indeed, by the open mapping theorem, $g\p{\set{\abs{z} < 1}}$ is open, and by Casorati-Weierstrass, $g\p{\set{\abs{z} > 1}}$ is open and dense. Thus, $g\p{\set{\abs{z} < 1}} \cap g\p{\set{\abs{z} > 1}} \neq \emptyset$, which is impossible.

Because $g$ omits $0$, we know that $\frac{1}{g}$ is holomorphic. By injectivity, $\frac{1}{g}$ any $0$ of $g$ must be simple by the argument principle, so any pole of $g$ is simple. Thus, we may write

$$
g\p{z} = \frac{a}{z} + b + cz
$$

for some $a, b, c \in \C$. Observe that

$$
g\p{z} = 0
\iff a + bz + cz^2 = 0
\iff z \in \set{\frac{-b + \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2c}, \frac{-b - \sqrt{b^2 - 4ac}}{2c}}
$$

i.e., if $a, c \neq 0$, then $g$ has two non-zero roots, which is impossible, so one of them must vanish. If $a = 0$, then $g\p{z} = b + cz$, which means $b = 0$ or else $g$ still has a non-zero root. Similarly, if $c = 0$, then $g\p{z} = \frac{a}{z} + b$ and as before, we need $b = 0$ in this case. Thus, $g\p{z}$ is either $\frac{a}{z}$ or $az$ for some non-zero $a \in \C$. Hence,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    f\p{z}
        &= \p{\phi \circ g \circ \phi^{-1}}\p{z} \\
        &= \frac{g\p{\phi^{-1}\p{z}}}{g\p{\phi^{-1}\p{z}} - 1} \\
        &= \frac{az}{az - \p{z - 1}} \quad\text{or}\quad \frac{a\p{z - 1}}{a\p{z - 1} - z}.
\end{aligned}
$$

In either case, $f$ is a Möbius transform, so $f$ is automatically surjective.

</solution>
