---
topics:
    - harmonic functions
    - residue theorem
---

<problem>

Let $a_1, \ldots, a_n$ be $n \geq 1$ distinct points in $\C$ and let $\Omega = \C \setminus \set{a_1, \ldots, a_n}$. Let $H\p{\Omega}$ be the vector space of real-valued harmonic functions on $\Omega$ and let $R\p{\Omega} \subseteq H\p{\Omega}$ be the space of real parts of analytic functions on $\Omega$. Prove the quotient space $H\p{\Omega}/R\p{\Omega}$ has dimension $n$, find a basis for this space, and prove it is a basis.

</problem>

<solution>

We claim that $\set{u_1, \ldots, u_n}$, where $u_k\p{z} = \frac{1}{2\pi}\log\,\abs{z - a_k}$, is a basis for $H\p{\Omega}/R\p{\Omega}$. Pick $\set{r_1, \ldots, r_n}$ small enough so that $\cl{B\p{a_k, r_k}} \subseteq \Omega$ and are pairwise disjoint.

First, we need to show that they are linearly independent. For each $u_k$, consider its conjugate differential ${}^*\diff{u_k} = -\p{u_k}_y \,\diff{x} + \p{u_k}_x \,\diff{y}$. Now suppose we have coefficients $c_1, \ldots, c_n$ such that $\sum_{k=1}^n c_k u_k = 0$. Taking conjugate differentials, we see

$$
\sum_{k=1}^n c_k {}^*\diff{u_k} = 0
\implies
0
    = \int_{\partial B\p{a_j,r_j}} \sum_{k=1}^n c_k {}^*\diff{u_k}
    = \sum_{k=1}^n c_k \delta_{kj}
    = c_j
$$

for all $j$ by direct calculation, so all the coefficients are zero, which means that the $u_k$ are linearly independent.

Let $\func{u}{\Omega}{\R}$ be harmonic and define $f = u_x - iu_y$, which is holomorphic on $\Omega$ since $u$ is $C^2$ and satisfies the Cauchy-Riemann equations. If $f$ had an antiderivative $F = U + iV$, then by the Cauchy-Riemann equations again,

$$
u_x - iu_y = f = F' = U_x - iV_y
\implies u = U + C,
$$

where $C$ is some constant, which would mean that $u = \Re{f}$. But this may not be the case since $\Omega$ is simply connected. To ensure that a holomorphic $g$ has an antiderivative, it suffices to have $\int_\gamma g\p{z} \,\diff{z} = 0$ for any closed $\gamma$ in $\Omega$.

For each $k$, let $c_k = \Res{f}{a_k}$. Then by the residue theorem,

$$
\int_\gamma f\p{z} - \sum_{k=1}^n \frac{c_k}{z - a_k} \,\diff{z} = 0
$$

for any closed curve $\gamma$ in $\Omega$. Thus, $g\p{z} = f\p{z} - \sum_{k=1}^n \frac{c_k}{z - a_k}$ is holomorphic in $\Omega$ with integral zero around any closed curve, so it has a primitive $G$ on $\Omega$, by Morera's theorem.

If we set $\tilde{u}\p{z} = u\p{z} + \sum_{k=1}^n c_k\log\,\abs{z - a_k}$, then

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \tilde{u}_x\p{z} - i\tilde{u}_y\p{z}
        &= u_x\p{z} - iu_y\p{z} + \sum_{k=1}^n c_k\p{\frac{\Re\p{z - a_k}}{\abs{z - a_k}^2} - \frac{i\Im\p{z - a_k}}{\abs{z - a_k}^2}} \\
        &= f\p{z} + \sum_{k=1}^n c_k\frac{\conj{z - a_k}}{\abs{z - a_k}^2} \\
        &= f\p{z} + \sum_{k=1}^n \frac{c_k}{z - a_k}.
\end{aligned}
$$

Hence, by our argument above, we see that $\tilde{u}$ is the real part of a harmonic function $G$ on all of $\Omega$, and so

$$
u\p{z} + \sum_{k=1}^n c_k\log\,\abs{z - a_k} = \Re{G\p{z}} \in R\p{\Omega}.
$$

In particular, $c_k$ is real, so the $u_k$ span and this completes the proof.

</solution>
