---
title: Proof of Proposition 1.2.15
date: "2024-10-03"
tags:
    - open sets
    - closed sets
publish: yes
---

# Proof of Proposition 1.2.15

Note that I used (i)-(viii) instead of (a)-(h) to label the statements. Everything else should be exactly the same as in the textbook.

<proposition> Basic properties of open and closed sets

Let $(X, d)$ be a metric space.

1. Let $E$ be a subset of $X$. Then $E$ is open if and only if $E = \int\p{E}$. In other words, $E$ is open if and only if for every $x \in E$, there exists an $r > 0$ such that $B\p{x, r} \subseteq E$.
2. Let $E$ be a subset of $X$. Then $E$ is closed if and only if $E$ contains all its adherent points. In other words, $E$ is closed if and only if for every convergent sequence $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ in $E$, the limit $\lim_{n\to\infty} x_n$ of that sequence also lies in $E$.
3. For any $x_0 \in X$ and $r > 0$, then the ball $B\p{x_0, r}$ is an open set. The set $\set{x \in X \st d\p{x, x_0} \leq r}$ is a closed set. (This set is sometimes called the closed ball of radius $r$ centered at $x_0$.)
4. Any singleton set $\set{x_0}$, where $x_0 \in X$, is automatically closed.
5. If $E$ is a subset of $X$, then $E$ is open if and only if the complement $X \setminus E \coloneqq \set{x \notin X \st x \notin E}$ is closed.
6. If $E_1, \ldots, E_n$ is a finite collection of open sets in $X$, then $E_1 \cap E_2 \cap \cdots \cap E_n$ is also open. If $F_1, \ldots, F_n$ is a finite collection of closed sets in $X$, then $F_1 \cup F_2 \cup \cdots \cup F_n$ is also closed.
7. If $\set{E_\alpha}_{\alpha \in I}$ is a collection of open sets in $X$ (where the index set $I$ could be finite, countable, or uncountable), then the union $\bigcup_{\alpha \in I} E_\alpha \coloneqq \set{x \in X \st x \in  E_\alpha \text{ for some } \alpha \in I}$ is also open. If $\set{F_\alpha}_{\alpha \in I}$ is a collection of closed sets in $X$, then the intersection $\bigcap_{\alpha \in I} F_\alpha \coloneqq \set{x \in X \mid x \in F_\alpha \text{ for all } \alpha \in I}$ is also closed.
8. If $E$ is any subset of $X$, then $\int\p{E}$ is the largest open set which is contained in $E$; in other words, $\int\p{E}$ is open, and given any other open set $V \subseteq E$, we have $V \subseteq\int\p{E}$. Similarly $\overline{E}$ is the smallest closed set which contains $E$; in other words, $\overline{E}$ is closed, and given any other closed set $K \supseteq E$, $K \supseteq \cl{E}$.

</proposition>

<proof>

1. "$\implies$"

    Assume $E$ is open. By definition, this means that $\bd{E} \cap E = \emptyset$.

    First, notice that $E \supseteq \int\p{E}$ by definition of $\int\p{E}$ (check this!). For the reverse inclusion, let $x \in E$. Recall that $\int\p{E}, \ext\p{E}, \bd{E}$ **partition** $X$; that is, the three sets are disjoint and their union is all of $X$:

    $$
    X = \int\p{E} \cup \ext\p{E} \cup \bd{E}.
    $$

    Since $x \in E$, we know that $x \notin \ext\p{E}$ (check this!). Because $\bd{E} \cap E = \emptyset$ and $x \in E$, this means that $x \notin \bd{E}$. Thus, $x \in \int\p{E}$.

    This shows that $E \subseteq \int\p{E}$, so $E = \int\p{E}$ by double-inclusion.

    "$\impliedby$"

    Assume $E = \int\p{E}$. By definition, we need to check that $\bd{E} \cap E = \emptyset$. We have

    $$
    \bd\p{E} \cap E = \bd\p{E} \cap \int\p{E} = \emptyset,
    $$

    where in the last step, we used the fact that $\int\p{E}, \ext\p{E}, \bd{E}$ partition $X$.

2. "$\implies$"

    Assume $E$ is closed. This means that $\bd{E} \subseteq E$. We know that the set of adherent points of $E$ satisfies $\cl{E} = E \cup \bd{E}$ (this is Proposition 1.2.10 in the textbook), so because both $E \subseteq E$ and $\bd{E} \subseteq E$, their union $\cl{E} \subseteq E$ also.

    "$\impliedby$"

    Assume that $\cl{E} \subseteq E$. By Proposition 1.2.10 again, we know $E \cup \bd{E} \subseteq E$. In particular, $\bd{E} \subseteq E$, so $E$ is closed by definition,

3. By part (i), we need to show that for all $y \in B\p{x_0, r}$, there exists $s > 0$ such that $B(y, s) \subseteq B\p{x_0, r}$. (It's a little confusing, but in (i), I replaced $E$ with $B\p{x_0, r}$, $x_0$ with $y$, and $r$ with $s$.)

    Let $s = r - d\p{x_0, y}$ (draw a picture to see where I got this from). Then if $z \in B\p{y, s}$,

    $$
    d\p{z, x}
      \leq d\p{z, y} + d\p{y, x_0}
      < s + d\p{x_0, y}
      = r.
    $$

    In other words, $d\p{z, x_0} < r$, which means $z \in B\p{x_0, r}$. Thus, $B\p{y, s} \subseteq B\p{x_0, r}$, so $B\p{x_0, r}$ is open.

    For brevity, I will denote $K\p{x_0, r} \coloneqq \set{x \in X \st d\p{x, x_0} \leq r}$. We'll use (ii): let $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ be a sequence of elements in $K\p{x_0, r}$ which converges to $x' \in X$. We need to show that $x' \in K\p{x_0, r}$. Since $x_n \in K\p{x_0, r}$, we have

    $$
    d\p{x', x_0}
      \leq d\p{x', x_n} + d\p{x_n, x_0}
      \leq d\p{x', x_n} + r.
    $$

    Lastly, because $x_n \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} x'$, we can send $n \to \infty$ to get $d\p{x', x_0} \leq r$.

    (I used the following fact from 131A: if $a_n \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} a$ and $a_n \leq L$ for all $n$, then $a \leq L$.)

4. We'll use (ii). Let $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ be a sequence of elements in $\set{x_0}$ which converges to $x' \in X$. Since $x_n \in \set{x_0}$, this means that $x_n = x_0$ for all $n$, i.e., $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ is a constant sequence. Thus, $x_n \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} x_0 \in \set{x_0}$, so $\set{x_0}$ is closed.

5. "$\implies$"

    Assume $E$ is open. Suppose $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ is a sequence of elements in $X \setminus E$ which converges to $x_0 \in X$. We need to show that $x_0 \in X \setminus E$. If $x_0 \in E$, then because $E$ is open, there exists $r > 0$ such that $B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq E$. But because $x_n \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} x_0$, there exists $n \geq m$ such that $x_n \in B\p{x_0, r}$. This means $x_n \in E \cap \p{X \setminus E} = \emptyset$, which is a contradiction.

    "$\impliedby$"

    Assume $X \setminus E$ is closed. We will show that $\bd{E} \cap E = \emptyset$. Let $x_0 \in \bd{E}$. By definition, this means that for all $r > 0$, we have $B\p{x_0, r} \cap \p{X \setminus E} \neq \emptyset$. But this is exactly what it means for $x_0 \in \cl{X \setminus E} = X \setminus E$.

6. Let $x_0 \in E_1 \cap \cdots \cap E_n$. For each $1 \leq i \leq n$, $x_0 \in E_i$, so because $E_i$ is open, there exists $r_i > 0$ such that $B\p{x_0, r_i} \subseteq E_i$. Let $r = \min\set{r_1, \ldots, r_n} > 0$ (this is where we use the fact that we have a _finite_ intersection). Then for each $1 \leq i \leq n$,

    $$
    B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq B\p{x_0, r_i} \subseteq E_i.
    $$

    Thus, $B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq E_1 \cap \cdots \cap E_n$, so $E_1 \cap \cdots \cap E_n$ is open.

    For the second statement, we can use (v) by taking complements. Note that

    $$
    X \setminus \p{F_1 \cap \cdots \cap F_n}
      = \p{X \setminus F_1} \cup \cdots \cup \p{X \setminus F_n}.
    $$

    By (v), $X \setminus F_1, \ldots, X \setminus F_n$ are all open sets, so the first statement (where we plug in $E_i = X \setminus F_i$) implies that $X \setminus \p{F_1 \cap \cdots \cap F_n}$ is open. By (v) again, $F_1 \cap \cdots \cap F_n$ is closed.

7. Let $x_0 \in \bigcup_{\alpha \in I} E_\alpha$. By definition, this means there exists $\alpha \in I$ such that $x_0 \in E_\alpha$. Since this $E_\alpha$ is open, there exists $r > 0$ such that

    $$
    B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq E_\alpha \subseteq \bigcup_{\alpha \in I} E_\alpha,
    $$

    so $\bigcup_{\alpha \in I} E_\alpha$ is open.

    As in the proof of (vi), we can prove the second statement by using (v) and taking complements.

    $$
    X \setminus \bigcap_{\alpha \in I} F_\alpha
      = \bigcup_{\alpha \in I} \p{X \setminus F_\alpha}
    $$

    is a union of open sets, hence open by the first statement. By (v), this means $\bigcap_{\alpha \in I} F_\alpha$ is closed.

8. First, we show that $\int\p{E}$ is open. Let $x_0 \in \int\p{E}$ so that there exists $r > 0$ such that $B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq E$. By (iii), $B\p{x_0, r}$ is an open set, so given any $y \in B\p{x_0, r}$, there exists $s > 0$ so that

    $$
    B\p{y, s} \subseteq B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq E,
    $$

    so $y \in \int\p{E}$. Thus, $B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq \int\p{E}$, so $\int\p{E}$ is open.

    Now, assume $V \subseteq E$, where $V$ is an open set. Then for any $x_0 \in V$, there exists $r > 0$ so that

    $$
    B\p{x_0, r} \subseteq V \subseteq E,
    $$

    so $x_0 \in \int\p{E}$. Thus, $V \subseteq \int\p{E}$.

    Next, we show that $\cl{E}$ is a closed set. Let $\p{\cl{x}_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ be a sequence of elements in $\cl{E}$ which converges to $x_0 \in E$. We need to show that $x_0 \in \cl{E}$, which means we need to find a sequence of elements in $E$ which converges to $x_0$. Since $\cl{x}_n \in \cl{E}$, we know that for any $r > 0$, $B\p{\cl{x}, r} \cap E \neq \emptyset$. In particular, if $r = \frac{1}{n}$, then there exists $x_n \in E$ such that $x_n \in B\p{\cl{x}, \frac{1}{n}}$. The sequence $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ also converges to $x_0$:

    $$
    d\p{x_n, x_0}
      \leq d\p{x_n, \cl{x}_n} + d\p{\cl{x}_n, x_0}
      \leq \frac{1}{n} + d\p{\cl{x}_n, x_0}.
    $$

    Sending $n \to \infty$ (as we did in the proof of (iii)), the right-hand side tends to $0$, so $x_n \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} x_0$. This shows that $x_0 \in \cl{E}$, so $\cl{E}$ is closed.

    Lastly, if $K$ is a closed set such that $K \supseteq E$. Let $x_0 \in \cl{E}$. Then there exists a sequence $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ of elements in $E$ such that $x_n \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} x_0$. But because $E \subseteq K$, this means $\p{x_n}_{n=m}^\infty$ is also a sequence of elements in $K$ which converges to $x_0$, so $x_0 \in \cl{K} = K$. Thus, $\cl{E} \subseteq K$.

</proof>

<remark>

It's important in (vi) (but _not_ in (vii)) that the number of open/closed sets is **finite**. Here are two counter-examples from $\p{\R, \abs{\,\cdot\,}}$.

1. Let $E_n = \p{-\frac{1}{n}, \frac{1}{n}}$. Then

    $$
    \bigcap_{n=1}^\infty E_n = \set{0},
    $$

    which is not an open set. Indeed, these sets are equal since $0 \in E_n$ for all $n \geq 1$, and if $x_0 \in \bigcap_{n=1}^\infty E_n$, then $x_0$ satisfies

    $$
    -\frac{1}{n} < x_0 < \frac{1}{n} \iff \abs{x_0} < \frac{1}{n}.
    $$

    If $x_0 \neq 0$, then if $n_0$ is large enough, we have $\abs{x_0} < \frac{1}{n_0} < \abs{x_0}$, which is not possible. Thus, it must be the case that $x_0 = 0$, which proves that the two sets above are equal.

    (Notice how I didn't mention that $\set{0}$ is closed. In general, a set can be open, closed, both open and closed, or neither open nor closed. In other words, $\set{0}$ being closed doesn't tell you whether or not it's open.)

2. $F_n = \br{-1 + \frac{1}{n}, 1 - \frac{1}{n}}$ gives another counter-example (exercise below).

</remark>

<exercise>

Let $F_n = \br{-1 + \frac{1}{n}, 1 - \frac{1}{n}}$. Compute $\bigcup_{n=1}^\infty F_n$ and show that it is not closed (which is _not_ the same as showing that it's open).

</exercise>
