---
topics:
    - measure theory
    - construction
related:
---

<problem>

Construct a Borel subset $E$ of the real line $\R$ such that for all intervals $\br{a, b}$ we have

$$
0 < m\p{E \cap \br{a, b}} < b - a
$$

where $m$ denotes Lebesgue measure.

</problem>

<solution>

Let $\set{r_n}_n$ be an enumeration of $\Q$. Define $I_n = \p{r_n - 2^{-n}, r_n + 2^{-n}}$,

$$
G_n = \bigcup_{k \geq n} I_k.
$$

$G_n$ is open since it is a union of open sets. Also $G_n$ contains all but possibly finitely many rational numbers, so it is dense. By construction, $G_{n+1} \subseteq G_n$ and

$$
m\p{G_n} \leq \sum_{k=n}^\infty 2 \cdot 2^{-k} = 4 \cdot 2^{-n} \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} 0.
$$

Fix $k \geq 1$. We will construct disjoint sets which remove a small, positive measure portion of $I_k$.

By density of $\Q$ again, for any $n \geq 1$, there exists $j \geq n$ such that $q_j \in I_k \implies I_j \cap I_k \neq \emptyset$. Since $I_j \subseteq G_n$,

$$
m\p{I_k \cap G_n} \geq m\p{I_k \cap I_j} > 0.
$$

Thus, since $m\p{G_\ell} \to 0$ as $\ell \to \infty$, there exists $\ell > n$ such that

$$
0 < m\p{G_\ell} < m\p{I_k \cap G_n} \implies m\p{I_k \cap G_n \setminus G_\ell} > 0,
$$

since $G_\ell \subseteq G_n$. Intuitively, any interval $I_k$ will intersect with $G_n$ with positive measure. To get infinitely many of these, we can remove the tail $G_\ell$ of $G_n$ and continue inductively.

Let $n_1 = 1$, and inductively pick $n_1 < n_2 < \cdots$ as follows: Given $n_{2k-1}$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
\exists &&n_{2k} &> n_{2k-1}
    &&\text{ such that } m\p{I_k \cap G_{n_{2k-1}} \setminus G_{n_{2k}}}
    &&> 0, \text{ and} \\
\exists &&n_{2k+1} &> n_{2k}
    &&\text{ such that } m\p{I_k \cap G_{n_{2k}} \setminus G_{n_{2k+1}}}
    &&> 0.
\end{aligned}
$$

Moreover, because $n \subseteq m \implies G_m \subseteq G_n$, it follows that the $G_{n_{2k-1}} \setminus G_{n_{2k}}$ are pairwise disjoint. Set

$$
E = \bigcup_{k=1}^\infty G_{n_{2k-1}} \setminus G_{n_{2k}}.
$$

Now let $I = \br{a, b} \subseteq \R$ be such that $a < b$. If $n$ is large enough, then $\br{a + 2^{-n}, b - 2^{-n}} \neq \emptyset$. Thus, by density, there exists $k \geq n$ such that $q_k \in \br{a + 2^{-n}, b - 2^{-n}}$, and so

$$
a + 2^{-n} \leq q_k \leq b - 2^{-n} \implies a \leq q_k - 2^{-n} \leq q_k + 2^{-n} \leq b,
$$

which means $I_k \subseteq I$.

Notice that $E \cap \p{G_{n_{2k}} \setminus G_{n_{2k+1}}} = \emptyset$ by construction. Indeed, $G_{n_{2\ell-1}}$ is always odd, whereas $G_{n_{2k}}$ is even, and the $G_{n_{m}} \setminus G_{n_{m+1}}$ are pairwise disjoint. Consequently, $G_{n_{2k}} \setminus G_{n_{2k+1}} \subseteq E^\comp$, which means

$$
\begin{aligned}
    m\p{I \setminus E}
        \geq m\p{I_k \setminus E}
        \geq m\p{I_k \cap G_{n_{2k}} \setminus G_{n_{2k+1}}}
        > 0.
\end{aligned}
$$

On the other hand,

$$
m\p{E \cap I} \geq m\p{E \cap I_k} \geq m\p{I_k \cap G_{n_{2k-1}} \setminus G_{n_{2k}}} > 0.
$$

Hence, $0 < m\p{E \cap I} < m\p{I}$, which was what we wanted.

</solution>
