---
topics:
    - meromorphic functions
    - periodic functions
    - residue theorem
related:
---

<problem>

Let $f$ be a non-constant meromorphic function on the complex plane $\C$ that obeys

$$
f\p{z} = f\p{z + \sqrt{2}} = f\p{z + i\sqrt{2}}.
$$

(In particular, the poles of these three functions coincide.) Assume $f$ has at most one pole in the closed unit disc

$$
\cl{D} = \set{z \mid \abs{z} \leq 1}.
$$

1. Prove that $f$ has exactly one pole in $\cl{D}$.
2. Prove that this is not a simple pole.

</problem>

<solution>

1. Notice that the conditions imply that $f$ is double periodic, so the behavior of $f$ in the rectangle $R = \br{0, \sqrt{2}} \times \br{0, \sqrt{2}}$ determine the behavior of $f$ globally.

    Suppose first that $f$ has no poles in $R$. Since $R$ is compact, this means that $f$ is bounded on $R$, which means by double periodicity that $f$ is bounded on all of $\C$. By Lioville's theorem, this implies $f$ is constant, which is impossible. Thus, $f$ must have at least one pole $z_0 \in R$.

    By symmetry, the point furthest from every vertex of $R$ must be the center $\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}} + \frac{i}{\sqrt{2}}$, which has distance $1$ from every vertex. Let $v$ be a closest vertex to $z_0$ so that $\abs{z_0 - v} \leq 1$. Thus, by double periodicity, $f$ must have a pole within distance $1$ of $0$, i.e., $f$ has at least one pole in $\cl{D}$. By assumption, $f$ has exactly one pole in $\cl{D}$, as required.

2. Consider a different rectangle $R = \br{-\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}, \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}} \times \br{-\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}, \frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}}$. Notice that $R$ has side length $\sqrt{2}$, so this is a fundamental domain for $f$, by the periodicity conditions. Moreover, $\partial{R}$ contains no poles. Indeed, $R \subseteq \cl{D}$, so by periodicity, if there is a pole on one of the sides, then there will be another pole on the opposite side, but $\cl{D}$ has exactly one pole, which is impossible.

    Let $\gamma_L, \gamma_B, \gamma_R, \gamma_T$ be the left, bottom, right, top side of $\partial{R}$ oriented counter-clockwise, respectively. By periodicity, $f$ takes on the same values on $\gamma_L$ as it does on $\gamma_R$, and $\gamma_B$ as it does on $\gamma_T$. Thus, because they are oriented oppositely,

    $$
    \int_{\gamma_L} f\p{z} \,\diff{z} = -\int_{\gamma_R} f\p{z} \,\diff{z}
    \quad\text{and}\quad
    \int_{\gamma_B} f\p{z} \,\diff{z} = -\int_{\gamma_T} f\p{z} \,\diff{z}.
    $$

    Thus, $\int_\gamma f\p{z} \,\diff{z}$ vanishes. But by the residue theorem, this means

    $$
    0 = \int_\gamma f\p{z} \,\diff{z} = 2\pi i \Res{f}{z_0}.
    $$

    Consequently, the $\p{z - z_0}^{-1}$ term in the Laurent series of $f$ vanishes, so $z_0$ cannot be a simple pole.

</solution>
