---
topics:
    - measure theory
---

<problem>

Let $\br{a, b} \subseteq \R$ be a finite interval and let $\func{f}{\br{a,b}}{\R}$ be a bounded Borel measurable function.

1. Prove that $\set{x \in \br{a, b} \mid f \text{ continuous at } x}$ is Borel measurable.
2. Prove that $f$ is Riemann integrable if and only if it is continuous almost everywhere.

</problem>

<solution>

1. For $n \geq 1$, let $\set{t_k^{\p{n}}}_{1 \leq k \leq n}$ be a partition of $\br{a, b}$. Then set $I_k^{\p{n}} = \pco{t_{k-1}^{\p{n}}, t_k^{\p{n}}}$ and

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        L_n
            &= \sum_{k=1}^n \chi_{I_k^{\p{n}}} \inf_{t \in I_k^{\p{n}}} f\p{t} \\
        U_n
            &= \sum_{k=1}^n \chi_{I_k^{\p{n}}} \sup_{t \in I_k^{\p{n}}} f\p{t}.
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    These are Borel functions since each $\chi_{I_k^{\p{n}}}$ is Borel. Observe that if $x$ is a point of continuity for $f$, then there exists (a unique) $k \geq 1$ such that $x \in I_k^{\p{n}}$, so

    $$
    U_n\p{x} - L_n\p{x}
        = \sup_{t \in I_k^{\p{n}}} f\p{t} - \inf_{t \in I_k^{\p{n}}} f\p{t} \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} 0.
    $$

    Conversely, if $U_n\p{x} - L_n\p{x} \to 0$ for some $x \in \br{a, b}$, then for all $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $N \in \N$ such that whenever $n \geq N$, we have

    $$
    \sup_{t \in I_{k_n}^{\p{n}}} f\p{t} - \inf_{t \in I_{k_n}^{\p{n}}} f\p{t} \leq \epsilon,
    $$

    where $k_n$ is such that $x \in I_{k_n}^{\p{n}}$ for all $n \geq 1$. Hence, if $\delta = d\p{x, \p{I_{k_N}^{\p{N}}}^\comp}$ and $\abs{x - y} \leq \frac{\delta}{2}$, we see $y \in I_{k_N}^{\p{N}}$ as well. Consequently,

    $$
    \abs{f\p{x} - f\p{y}}
        \leq \sup_{t \in I_{k_N}^{\p{N}}} f\p{t} - \inf_{t \in I_{k_N}^{\p{N}}} f\p{t}
        \leq \epsilon,
    $$

    so $x$ is a point of continuity if and only if $F\p{x} \coloneqq \lim_{n\to\infty} \p{U_n\p{x} - L_n\p{x}} = 0$. Since each $U_n - L_n$ is Borel, $F$ is Borel as a limit of these and so

    $$
    \tag{$*$}
    \set{x \in \br{a, b} \mid f \text{ continuous at } x}
        = F^{-1}\p{\set{0}}
    $$

    is Borel.

2. If $f$ is Riemann integrable, let $R\p{f}$ denote the Riemann integral of $f$ over $\br{a, b}$. Then by definition, the Darboux sums must converge to $R\p{f}$, so if $m$ denotes Lebesgue measure,

    $$
    R\p{f}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_{\br{a,b}} L_n \,\diff{m}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_{\br{a,b}} U_n \,\diff{m}.
    $$

    Since $f$ is bounded by some $M > 0$, $\abs{U_n - L_n} \leq M \in L^1\p{\br{a,b}}$, so by dominated convergence,

    $$
    \int_{\br{a,b}} F \,\diff{m}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_{\br{a,b}} U_n - L_n \,\diff{m}
        = 0.
    $$

    But $U_n - L_n \geq 0$, so $F \geq 0 \implies F = 0$ almost everywhere. From ($*$), we immediately see that $f$ is continuous almost everywhere.

    Conversely, suppose $f$ is continuous almost everywhere, so ($*$) implies that $F = 0$ almost everywhere. Thus,

    $$
    0
        = \int_{\br{a,b}} F \,\diff{m}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_{\br{a,b}} U_n - L_n \,\diff{m}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \p{\int_{\br{a,b}} U_n \,\diff{m} - \int_{\br{a,b}} L_n \,\diff{m}}
    $$

    by dominated convergence again. Hence, we see that all Darboux sums converge to the same number, namely $R\p{f}$, so $f$ is Riemann integrable.

</solution>
