---
topics:
    - subharmonic functions
    - Phragmén-Lindelöf
---

<problem>

Let $\Omega = \set{\p{x, y} \in \R^2 \mid x > 0,\ y > 0}$ and let $u$ be subharmonic in $\Omega$, continuous in $\cl{\Omega}$, such that

$$
u\p{x, y}
    \leq \abs{x + iy},
$$

for large $\p{x, y} \in \Omega$. Assume that

$$
u\p{x, 0}
    \leq ax,
\quad u\p{0, y} \leq by,
\quad x, y \geq 0,
$$

for some $a, b > 0$. Show that

$$
u\p{x, y}
    \leq ax + by,
\quad \p{x, y} \in \Omega.
$$

</problem>

<solution>

Observe that

$$
u\p{x, y} - \p{ax + by}
    \leq u\p{x, y}
    \leq \abs{x + iy}
$$

for large $\p{x, y} \in \Omega$, by assumption. Recall that $\phi\p{z} = \abs{z}^k$ is a Phragmén-Lindelöf function for $\Omega$, where $0 < k < 2$. In particular, $k = 1$ works. Thus, because $u\p{x, y} - \p{ax + by}$ is subharmonic ($u$ is subharmonic and $ax + by$ is harmonic), it attains its maximum on the boundary.

On $y = 0$, our assumption gives $u\p{x, 0} - ax \leq 0$. Similarly, if $x = 0$, we have $u\p{0, y} - by \leq 0$ as well. Hence, $u\p{x, y} - \p{ax + by} \leq 0$ on all of $\Omega$, i.e.,

$$
u\p{x, y} \leq ax + by
$$

on all of $\Omega$.

For completeness, we will prove that $\phi\p{z} = \abs{z}^k$ for $0 < k < \frac{\pi}{\beta - \alpha}$ is Phragmén-Lindelöf function (PL function) for the sector $\Omega = \set{\alpha < \Arg{z} < \beta}$.

Let $0 < k < k_1 < \frac{\pi}{\beta - \alpha}$ and $\gamma = \alpha + \frac{\beta - \alpha}{2} = \frac{\alpha + \beta}{2}$ (this is the rotation needed to center the sector about the positive real axis). Set

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \psi\p{z}
         = \Re\p{\p{e^{-i\gamma}z}^{k_1}}
        &= \Re\p{e^{k_1\Log\p{e^{-i\gamma}z}}} \\
        &= \Re\p{e^{k_1\log\,\abs{z} + ik_1\p{\Arg\p{z}-\gamma}}} \\
        &= \abs{z}^{k_1}\cos\p{k_1\p{\Arg\p{z} - \gamma}},
\end{aligned}
$$

which is harmonic as the real part of an analytic function. Notice also that

$$
-\frac{\beta - \alpha}{2}
    = \alpha - \gamma
    < \Arg\p{z} - \gamma
    < \beta - \gamma
    = \frac{\beta - \alpha}{2}.
$$

Hence,

$$
k_1\p{\Arg\p{z} - \gamma}
    \in \br{-k_1\p{\frac{\beta - \alpha}{2}}, k_1\p{\frac{\beta - \alpha}{2}}}
    \subseteq \p{-\frac{\pi}{2}, \frac{\pi}{2}},
$$

i.e., $k$ is chosen so that the cosine term in $\psi$ is bounded strictly above $0$. Thus, for $z$ large,

$$
\frac{\phi\p{z}}{\psi\p{z}}
    \leq C\abs{z}^{k-k_1} \xrightarrow{z\to\infty} 0.
$$

Let $u$ be subharmonic on $\Omega$ and continuous on $\cl{\Omega}$. Suppose further that $u\p{z} \leq M$ on $\partial\Omega$ and satisfies $u\p{z} \leq C\phi\p{z}$ for large $z$ and some $C > 0$.

Let $\epsilon > 0$ and set $u_\epsilon\p{z} = u\p{z} - \epsilon\psi\p{z}$. This is subharmonic since $u$ is and because $\psi$ is harmonic. Then

$$
u_\epsilon\p{z}
    \leq C\phi\p{z} - \epsilon\psi\p{z}
    = -\psi\p{z}\p{\epsilon - C\frac{\phi\p{z}}{\psi\p{z}}}
        \xrightarrow{z\to\infty} -\infty.
$$

In particular, there exists $R > 0$ so that for large $z$, $u_\epsilon\p{z} \leq M$. Since $B\p{0, R} \cap \Omega$ is a bounded set, we may apply the maximum principle on $u_\epsilon$ to see $u_\epsilon\p{z} \leq M$ on $\cl{B\p{0, R}} \cap \Omega$. Hence, $u_\epsilon \leq M$ on all of $\Omega$. Sending $\epsilon \to 0$, we see that $u \leq M$ on all of $\Omega$, which completes the proof.

</solution>
