---
topics:
    - Baire category theorem
---

<problem>

A function $f \in C\p{\br{0,1}}$ is called Hölder continuous of order $\delta > 0$ if there is a constant $C > 0$ such that $\abs{f\p{x} - f\p{y}} \leq C\abs{x - y}^\delta$, $x, y \in \br{0, 1}$. Show that the Hölder continuous functions form a set of the first category (a meager set) in $C\p{\br{0,1}}$.

</problem>

<solution>

We denote the space of Hölder continuous functions on $\br{0, 1}$ of order $\delta > 0$ via $H^\delta$.

First, let us show that for any $\delta > 0$, $H^\delta$ is nowhere dense. It suffices to show that for any $f \in C\p{\br{0,1}}$ and $\epsilon > 0$, there exists $g \in C\p{\br{0,1}} \setminus H^\delta$ such that $\norm{f - g}_{L^\infty} < \epsilon$. Indeed, this implies that any open neighborhood in $H^\delta$ contains an element outside of $H^\delta$, i.e., $H^\delta$ has empty interior.

Recall that piecewise linear continuous functions are dense in $C\p{\br{0,1}}$ (e.g., $f$ is uniformly continuous, so we can approximate $f$ uniformly with a piecewise linear function on a fine enough partition of $\br{0, 1}$). Thus, we may assume without loss of generality that $f$ is a piecewise linear function. In particular, $f$ is some linear function $f\p{0} + mx$ on $\br{0, \eta}$ for some $\eta > 0$.

Our prototype for functions in $H^\alpha \setminus H^\beta$ are $x^\alpha$ where $\alpha < \beta$. Indeed, in this case, Jensen's inequality applied to the concave function $t \mapsto t^\beta$ yields

$$
\abs{x^\alpha - y^\alpha}
    = \abs{\int_0^1 t^\alpha\chi_{\br{x,y}} \,\diff{t}}
    \leq \abs{\p{\int_0^1 t\chi_{\br{x,y}} \,\diff{t}}^\alpha}
    = \abs{x - y}^\alpha,
$$

but

$$
\frac{\abs{x^\alpha - y^\alpha}}{\abs{x - y}^\beta}
    = \frac{\abs{x^\alpha - y^\alpha}}{\abs{x - y}^\alpha} \cdot \frac{1}{\abs{x - y}^{\beta-\alpha}}
    \xrightarrow{\abs{x-y} \to 0} \infty,
$$

since the first term is bounded. Thus, our goal is to approximate $f$ near $0$ with $x^{\delta/2} \notin H^\delta$. If $a > 0$, then

$$
0 \leq x^{\delta/2} - x \leq a^{\delta/2}
$$

on $\br{0, a}$, since $x \in \br{0, 1}$, so $x^{\delta/2} \geq x$, and because $x^{\delta/2}$ is an increasing function. Let $a \in \br{0, t}$ be small enough such that $a^{\delta/2} < \epsilon$. Then define

$$
h\p{x}
    =   \begin{cases}
            x^{\delta/2} & \text{if } 0 \leq x \leq a, \\
            a^{\delta/2} & \text{if } a \leq x \leq a^{\delta/2}, \\
            x            & \text{if } a^{\delta/2} \leq x \leq t,
        \end{cases}
$$

which is a continuous by construction. Essentially, $h$ is $x^{\delta/2}$ for a small amount of time before becoming $x$. We claim that

$$
g\p{x}
    =   \begin{cases}
            f\p{0} + mh\p{x} & \text{if } 0 \leq x \leq t, \\
            f\p{x}           & \text{if } t \leq x \leq 1.
        \end{cases}
$$

has the desired properties. On $\br{0, a}$, we get

$$
\abs{f\p{x} - g\p{x}}
    = \abs{\p{f\p{0} + mx} - \p{f\p{0} + mx^{\delta/2}}}
    = m\abs{x^{\delta/2} - x}
    \leq m\epsilon.
$$

On $\br{a, a^{\delta/2}}$,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \abs{f\p{x} - g\p{x}}
        = \abs{\p{f\p{0} + mx} - \p{f\p{0} + ma^{\delta/2}}}
        &= m\abs{x - a^{\delta/2}} \\
        &\leq m\abs{a - a^{\delta/2}} \\
        &< m\epsilon.
\end{aligned}
$$

Finally, on $\br{a^{\delta/2}, 1}$, $g\p{x} = f\p{x}$ by construction, so $\norm{f - g}_{L^\infty} \leq m\epsilon$, which proves that $H^\delta$ is nowhere dense.

Now, define

$$
E_{n,m} = \set{f \in C\p{\br{0,1}} \st \abs{f\p{x} - f\p{y}} \leq n\abs{x - y}^{1/m}}
$$

so that

$$
H^{1/m} = \bigcup_{n=1}^\infty E_{n,m}.
$$

Notice that $E_{n,m}$ is closed in $C\p{\br{0,1}}$: if $\set{f_n}_n \subseteq E_{n,m}$ is a sequence which converges uniformly to $f \in C\p{\br{0,1}}$, then $\abs{f_k\p{x} - f_k\p{y}} \leq n\abs{x - y}^{1/m}$ for all $k \geq 1$. Sending $k \to \infty$, we easily see that $f \in E_{n,m}$ as well. Finally, observe that if $\alpha \leq \beta$, then $\abs{x - y} \leq 1 \implies \abs{x - y}^\alpha \leq \abs{x - y}^\beta$. Hence, $H^\alpha \subseteq H^\beta$, which means the Hölder continuous functions are given by

$$
\bigcup_{m=1}^n H^{1/m} = \bigcup_{m=1}^n \bigcup_{n=1}^\infty E_{n,m},
$$

so it is a countable union of closed, nowhere dense sets, hence meager.

</solution>
