---
topics:
    - Riemann mapping theorem
---

<problem>

An **analytic Jordan curve** is a set of the form

$$
\Gamma
    = f\p{\set{\abs{z} = 1}}
$$

where $f$ is analytic and 1-1 on an annulus $\set{r < \abs{z} < \frac{1}{r}}$, $0 < r < 1$.

Let $\C^* = \C \cup \set{\infty}$ be the Riemann sphere, let $N < \infty$, and let $\Omega \subseteq \C^*$ be a domain for which $\partial\Omega$ has $N$ connected components, none of which are single points. Prove there is a conformal (i.e., one-to-one analytic) mapping from $\Omega$ onto a domain bounded by $N$ pairwise disjoint analytic Jordan curves.

</problem>

<solution>

This problem is probably incorrect as stated. Consider this [StackExchange post](https://math.stackexchange.com/a/2600838/406803). The boundary of the curve in the question is self-intersecting, so it cannot be the image of any 1-1 function. Instead, the problem should say that $\C^* \setminus \Omega$ has $N$ connected components, rather than the boundary itself having $N$ connected components.

Let $N$ be the number of connected components of $\Omega$. We will show that $\Omega$ is conformally equivalent to $\D \setminus \p{E_1 \cup \cdots \cup E_{N-1}}$ where $E_1, \ldots, E_{N-1} \subseteq \D$ are simply connected by induction on $N$:

If $N = 1$, then $\Omega$ is simply connected. If this were not the case, then there exists a simple closed curve $\gamma \subseteq \Omega$ which is not contractible to a point. Hence, the interior of $\gamma$ contains a point $z_0 \in \C^* \setminus \Omega$. This means that $\C^* \setminus \Omega$ is contained in the interior of $\gamma$ since it is connected, but this implies that $z_0$ is in a different component of the portion of $\C^* \setminus \Omega$ which lies in the exterior of $\gamma$, a contradiction. Hence, $\Omega$ is simply connected with more than one point in its complement, so by the Riemann mapping theorem, $\Omega$ is conformally equivalent to $\D$. Since $\partial\D$ is the unit circle, it is trivially an analytic Jordan curve.

Now suppose that the claim is true when for domains with $N$ connected components in its complement, and assume $\C^* \setminus \Omega$ has $N + 1$ connected components, $C_1, \ldots, C_{N+1}$. Let $\Omega' = \Omega \cup C_{N+1}$, which has $\C^* \setminus \Omega' = C_1 \cup \cdots \cup C_N$. By the inductive hypothesis, we get a conformal map $\func{\phi}{\Omega'}{\D \setminus \p{E_1 \cup \cdots \cup E_{N-1}}}$ with the $E_k$'s simply connected. On the other hand, if we let $U = \C^* \setminus \phi\p{C_{N+1}}$, then $\C^* \setminus U$ has only one connected component, so by the argument above, we see that $U$ is simply connected. Thus, because $C_{N+1}$ is not a singleton, the Riemann mapping theorem gives a conformal map $\func{\psi}{U}{\D}$.

If $E_{N+1} = \phi\p{C_{N+1}}$, then we get the conformal map

$$
\func{\res{\phi}{\Omega}}{\Omega}{\D \setminus \p{E_1 \cup \cdots \cup E_{N+1}}}
$$

with

$$
\psi\p{\partial E_{N+1}}
    = \psi\p{\partial\p{\C^* \setminus U}}
    = \partial\D,
$$

i.e., $\partial E_{N+1}$ is conformally equivalent to $S^1$, which is an analytic Jordan curve, and this completes the proof.

</solution>
