---
topics:
    - Stone-Weierstrass
---

<problem>

Let $\p{X, \rho}$ be a compact metric space which has at least two points, and let $C\p{X}$ be the space of continuous functions $X \to \R$ with the uniform norm $\norm{f} = \sup_X \abs{f\p{x}}$. Let $D$ be a dense subset of $X$ and for each $y \in D$ define $f_y \in C\p{X}$ by

$$
f_y\p{x} = \rho\p{x, y}.
$$

Let $A$ be the subalgebra of $C\p{X}$ generated by the collection $\set{f_y \mid y \in D}$ (with pointwise addition and multiplication of functions).

1. Prove that $A$ is dense in $C\p{X}$ under the uniform norm.
2. Prove that $C\p{X}$ is separable.

</problem>

<solution>

1. In light of Stone-Weierstrass, it suffices to show that $A$ vanishes nowhere and separates points.

    Let $x \in X$. Then by assumption, there exists $y \in X$ different from $x$, so let $\delta = \rho\p{x, y} > 0$. By density of $D$, there exists $z \in D$ such that $\rho\p{y, z} < \frac{\delta}{2}$. Then by the triangle inequality,

    $$
    \rho\p{x, z}
        \geq \rho\p{x, y} - \rho\p{y, z}
        \geq \frac{\delta}{2}
        > 0,
    $$

    so in particular, $f_z\p{x} \neq 0$. To show that $A$ separates points, let $x, y \in X$ be distinct. As before, let $\delta = \rho\p{x, y} > 0$. By density, there exists $z \in D$ such that $\rho\p{y, z} < \frac{\delta}{2}$, so $\rho\p{x, z} \geq \frac{\delta}{2}$ by the same calculation as before. Thus,

    $$
    f_z\p{y} < \frac{\delta}{2} \leq f_z\p{x},
    $$

    so $f_z$ separates $x$ and $y$, so $A$ is dense in $C\p{X}$.

2. Since $X$ is a compact metric space, it is separable. Thus, let $D$ be a countable dense subset of $X$ so that $A$ (as in the previous part) is dense in $C\p{X}$. Notice that elements in $A$ have the form

    $$
    \sum_{k=1}^n c_k \prod_{j=1}^{m_k} f_{z_{jk}}
    $$

    where $z_{jk} \in D$, $n \in \N$, and $c_k \in \R$. Hence, it is easy to see that if we replaced $c_k$ with elements in $\Q$, then the resulting set of functions $B$ is dense in $A$, hence dense in $C\p{X}$. Since $\Q$ is countable and $D$ is countable, it follows that $B$ is also countable, so $C\p{X}$ is separable.

</solution>
