---
topics:
    - measure theory
---

<problem>

Let $\T$ be the unit circle in the complex plane $\C$ and for each $\alpha \in \T$ define the rotation map $\func{R_\alpha}{\T}{\T}$ by $R_\alpha\p{z} = \alpha z$. A Borel probability measure $\mu$ on $\T$ is called **$\alpha$-invariant** if $\mu\p{R_\alpha\p{E}} = \mu\p{E}$ for all Borel sets $E \subseteq \T$.

1. Let $m$ be Lebesgue measure on $\T$ (defined, for instance, by identifying $\T$ with $\pco{0, 1}$ through the exponential function). Show that for every $\alpha \in \T$, $M$ is $\alpha$-invariant.
2. Prove that if $\alpha$ is not a root of unity, then the set of powers $\set{\alpha^n \mid n \in \Z}$ is dense in $\T$.
3. Prove that, if we fix a single $\alpha \in \T$ which is not a root of unity, then $m$ is the only $\alpha$-invariant Borel probability measure on $\T$.

</problem>

<solution>

1. Given a Borel set $E$, we have

    $$
    m\p{R_\alpha\p{E}}
        = \int_0^1 \chi_{R_\alpha\p{E}}\p{e^{2\pi ix}} \,\diff{x}
        = \int_0^1 \chi_E\p{e^{2\pi i\p{x-\alpha}}} \,\diff{x}
        = m\p{E},
    $$

    since the Lebesgue measure is translation invariant and $e^{2\pi ix}$ is $1$-periodic.

2. If $\alpha$ is not a root of unity, then $\alpha$ must be irrational. Indeed, if this were not the case, then $\alpha = \frac{a}{b}$ for some integers $a, b$, so

    $$
    \p{e^{2\pi i\alpha}}^b
        = \p{e^{2\pi ia/b}}^b
        = e^{2\pi ia}
        = 1,
    $$

    i.e., $\alpha$ is a root of unity. Since $\alpha$ is irrational, it follows that $\set{\alpha^n \mid n \in \Z}$ are all distinct. Otherwise, if $\alpha^n = \alpha^m$, then

    $$
    e^{2\pi in\alpha} = e^{2\pi im\alpha}
    \implies e^{2\pi i\p{n-m}\alpha} = 1
    \implies \p{e^{2\pi i\alpha}}^{n-m} = 1,
    $$

    i.e., $\alpha$ would be a root of unity. Hence, the powers of $\alpha$ are all distinct, so they form an infinite subset of the compact space $\T$. Thus, they must accumulate, so for any $\epsilon > 0$, there exist $n, m \in \Z$ so that

    $$
    \abs{e^{2\pi i\p{n-m}\alpha} - 1}
        = \abs{e^{2\pi in\alpha} - e^{2\pi im\alpha}}
        \leq \epsilon.
    $$

    Thus,

    $$
    \T = \bigcup_{k=1}^\infty B\p{\p{e^{2\pi i\p{n-m}\alpha}}^k, \epsilon},
    $$

    so the powers of $\alpha$ are dense.

3. Let $\mu$ be a Borel probability measure which is $\alpha$-invariant on $\T$. We will show that $\mu$ is rotation invariant: let $\beta \in \T$ and $\epsilon > 0$. By density, there exists $\set{\alpha^{n_k}}_k$ so that $\alpha^{n_k} \to \beta$ in $\T$. Then

    $$
    \mu\p{E}
        = \mu\p{R_{\alpha^{n_k}}\p{E}}
        = \int_0^1 \chi_{R_{\alpha^{n_k}}\p{E}}\p{e^{2\pi i\theta}} \,\diff\mu\p{\theta}
        = \int_0^1 \chi_E\p{e^{2\pi i\p{\theta-n_k\alpha}}} \,\diff\mu\p{\theta}.
    $$

    Since $\mu$ is a probability measure, the integrand is bounded by $1$, which is $L^1\p{\mu}$, so by dominated convergence,

    $$
    \mu\p{E}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_0^1 \chi_E\p{e^{2\pi i\p{\theta-n_k\alpha}}} \,\diff\mu\p{\theta}
        = \int_0^1 \chi_E\p{e^{2\pi i\p{\theta-\beta}}} \,\diff\mu\p{\theta}
        = \mu\p{R_\beta\p{E}},
    $$

    so $\mu$ is rotation-invariant. Now, observe that

    $$
    \begin{gathered}
        1
            = \mu\p{\T}
            = \sum_{k=0}^{n-1} \mu\p{\br{\frac{k}{n}, \frac{k+1}{n}}}
            = n\mu\p{\br{\frac{k}{n}, \frac{k+1}{n}}} \\
        \implies
        \mu\p{\br{\frac{k}{n}, \frac{k+1}{n}}}
            = \frac{1}{n}
            = m\p{\br{\frac{k}{n}, \frac{k+1}{n}}}
    \end{gathered}
    $$

    for any $k = 0, \ldots, n-1$, so $\mu$ agrees with $m$ on rational intervals, hence on any interval, by dominated convergence. Thus, because intervals generate the Borel $\sigma$-algebra, it follows that $\mu = m$, which was what we wanted to show.

</solution>
