---
topics:
    - Banach-Alaoglu
---

<problem>

Let $\H = \set{z \in \C \mid \Im{z} > 0}$ be the upper-half plane. Let $\func{f}{\H}{\H}$ be a holomorphic function obeying

$$
\lim_{y\to\infty} yf\p{iy} = i
\quad\text{and}\quad
\abs{f\p{z}} \leq \frac{1}{\Im{z}} \quad\text{for all } z \in \H.
$$

1. For $\epsilon > 0$, write $g_\epsilon\p{x} = \frac{1}{\pi} \Im{f\p{x + i\epsilon}}$. Show that

    $$
    f\p{z + i\epsilon} = \int_\R \frac{g_\epsilon\p{x}}{x - z} \,\diff{x}.
    $$

2. Show that there exists a Borel probability measure $\mu$ on $\R$ such that

    $$
    f\p{z} = \int_\R \frac{\diff\mu\p{x}}{x - z}.
    $$

</problem>

<solution>

1. We have the Schwarz integral formula for the upper-half plane:

    $$
    f\p{z} = \frac{1}{\pi i} \int_\R \frac{\Re{f\p{x}}}{x - z} \,\diff{x} + C
    $$

    for $z \in \H$ and some real constant $C$. Replacing $f$ with $-if$, we see

    $$
    -if\p{z} = \frac{1}{\pi i} \int_\R \frac{\Im{f\p{x}}}{x - z} \,\diff{x} + C
    \implies f\p{z + i\epsilon} = \frac{1}{\pi} \int_\R \frac{\Im{f\p{x + i\epsilon}}}{x - z} \,\diff{x} + iC.
    $$

    We will show in (2) that $C = 0$.

2. The map $h \mapsto \int_\R hg_\epsilon \,\diff{x}$ defines a linear function on $C_0\p{\R}$, i.e., the closure of compactly supported continuous functions on $\R$. Thus, we may view $\set{g_\epsilon}_\epsilon \subseteq \p{C_0\p{\R}}^*$, the space of Radon measures. We wish to apply Banach-Alaoglu, so we need to show that $\norm{g_\epsilon}_{\p{C_0\p{\R}}^*}$ is uniformly bounded.

    Write $z = x + iy$. For $\epsilon > 0$, consider the contour $\gamma$, which is an upper semicircle centered at $x + i\epsilon$ of radius $R$. Notice that if $0 < \epsilon < y < R$, then $z$ is in the interior of $\gamma$ and $\conj{z} + 2i\epsilon$ is outside. Then by the Cauchy integral formula,

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        f\p{z}
            &= \frac{1}{2\pi i} \int_\gamma \p{\frac{1}{\zeta - z} - \frac{1}{\zeta - \conj{z} - 2i\epsilon}} f\p{\zeta} \,\diff\zeta \\
            &= \frac{1}{\pi} \int_\gamma \frac{y - \epsilon}{\p{\zeta - z}\p{\zeta - \conj{z} - 2i\epsilon}} f\p{\zeta} \,\diff\zeta \\
            &= \frac{1}{\pi} \int_{-R}^R \frac{y - \epsilon}{t^2 + \p{y - \epsilon}^2} f\p{x + i\epsilon + t} \,\diff{t} + \frac{i}{\pi} \int_0^\pi \frac{y - \epsilon}{R^2e^{2i\theta} + \p{y - \epsilon}^2} f\p{x + i\epsilon + Re^{i\theta}} Re^{i\theta} \,\diff\theta.
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    In the second integral, $\abs{f\p{x + i\epsilon + Re^{i\theta}}} \leq \frac{1}{\epsilon + R\sin\theta}$, and so the integrand tends to $0$ as $R \to \infty$. Thus, by dominated convergence, we may send $R \to \infty$ to get

    $$
    f\p{z} = \frac{1}{\pi} \int_\R \frac{y - \epsilon}{\p{t - x}^2 + \p{y - \epsilon}^2} f\p{t + i\epsilon} \,\diff{t}
    $$

    via a translation change of variables. Taking imaginary parts and multiplying both sides by $y$, we see

    $$
    \begin{gathered}
       \int_\R \frac{y - \epsilon}{\p{t - x}^2 + \p{y - \epsilon}^2} g_\epsilon\p{t} \,\diff{t}
           = \Im{f\p{z}}
           \leq \frac{1}{\Im{z}} \\
       \implies \int_\R \frac{y\p{y - \epsilon}}{\p{t - x}^2 + \p{y - \epsilon}^2} g_\epsilon\p{t} \,\diff{t} \leq 1.
    \end{gathered}
    $$

    Sending $y \to \infty$ and applying dominated convergence, we see $\int_\R g_\epsilon\p{t} \,\diff{t} \leq 1$. Thus, $\set{g_\epsilon}_\epsilon$ is uniformly bounded, so by Banach-Alaoglu and taking $\epsilon = \frac{1}{n}$, we get a subsequence $g_{n_k}$ which converges weakly to a Radon measure $\mu$. In particular, $\frac{1}{x - z} \in C_0\p{\R}$, so by weak convergence,

    $$
    \int_\R \frac{g_{n_k}\p{x}}{x - z} \,\diff{x} \xrightarrow{k\to\infty} \int_\R \frac{\diff\mu\p{x}}{x - z},
    $$

    which gives the representation

    $$
    f\p{z} = \int_\R \frac{\diff\mu\p{x}}{x - z} + iC.
    $$

    Notice that if $z = iy$, then $\abs{\frac{y}{x - iy}} = \frac{y}{\sqrt{x^2 + y^2}}$ is bounded. Since $\mu$ is a finite measure, we see that $\frac{1}{x - z} \in L^1\p{\R, \mu}$, is dominated by $1$, so by dominated convergence,

    $$
    \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_\R \frac{y}{x - iy} \,\diff\mu\p{x}
        = -\frac{1}{i} \mu\p{\R}
        = i\mu\p{\R}.
    $$

    If $C \neq 0$, then $yf\p{iy}$ would be unbounded, which implies that $C = 0$. Thus,

    $$
    i = \lim_{n\to\infty} yf\p{iy} = i\mu\p{\R}
    \implies \mu\p{\R} = 1,
    $$

    so $\mu\p{\R}$ is a probability measure.

</solution>
