---
topics:
    - Banach-Alaoglu
---

<problem>

Let $K$ be a non-empty compact subset of $\R^3$. For any Borel probability measure $\mu$ on $K$, define the _Newtonian energy_ $I\p{\mu} \in \poc{0, \infty}$ by

$$
I\p{\mu} = \int_K \int_K \frac{1}{\abs{x - y}} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{y}
$$

and let $R_K$ be the infimum of $I\p{\mu}$ over all Borel probability measures $\mu$ on $K$. Show that there exists a Borel probability measure $\mu$ such that $I\p{\mu} = R_K$.

</problem>

<solution>

By definition, there exists a sequence of Borel probability measures $\set{\mu_n}_n$ on $K$ such that $I\p{\mu_n} \to R_K$. Viewing $\set{\mu_n}_n \subseteq \p{C\p{K}}^*$, we find via Banach-Alaoglu a Borel probability measure $\mu$ and a subsequence $\set{\mu_{n_k}}_k$ such that for any continuous function $f \in C\p{K}$,

$$
\int_K f\p{x} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x} \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} \int_K f\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{x}.
$$

Next, we will show that $\mu_n \otimes \mu_n \to \mu \otimes \mu$ weakly on $C\p{K \times K}$. Notice that $A = \set{\sum_{k=1}^n f_k\p{x}g_k\p{y} \mid f_k, g_k \in C\p{K}}$ is closed under addition, scalar multiplication, and multiplication. It also separates points: if $\p{x, y} \neq \p{x', y'}$, say, $x \neq x'$, then $x \cdot 1$ separates them. Since $1 \in A$, it vanishes nowhere, so by Stone-Weierstrass, $A$ is dense in $C\p{K \times K}$. Hence, given $\epsilon > 0$ and $f \in C\p{K \times K}$, there exist $g, h \in C\p{K}$ such that $\norm{f\p{x, y} - g\p{x}h\p{y}}_{L^\infty} < \epsilon$. By weak convergence, if $n$ is large enough, then

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \abs{\int_{K \times K} g\p{x}h\p{y} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{x} - \int_{K \times K} g\p{x}h\p{y} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x}}
        &= \abs{\p{\int_K g \,\diff\mu} \p{\int_K h \,\diff\mu} - \p{\int_K g \,\diff\mu_n} \p{\int_K h \,\diff\mu_n}} \\
        &\leq \abs{\p{\int_K g \,\diff\mu} \p{\int_K h \,\diff\mu} - \p{\int_K g \,\diff\mu} \p{\int_K h \,\diff\mu_n}} + \abs{\p{\int_K g \,\diff\mu} \p{\int_K h \,\diff\mu_n} - \p{\int_K g \,\diff\mu_n} \p{\int_K h \,\diff\mu_n}} \\
        &\leq \abs{\int_K g \,\diff\mu}\abs{\int_K h \,\diff\mu - \int_K h \,\diff\mu_n} + \abs{\int_K h \,\diff\mu_n}\abs{\int_K g \,\diff\mu - \int_K g \,\diff\mu_n} \\
        &\leq \epsilon,
\end{aligned}
$$

since $\set{\int_K g \,\diff\mu_n}_n, \set{\int_K h \,\diff\mu_n}_n$ are convergent, hence bounded sequences. Thus,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \abs{\int_{K \times K} f \,\diff\p{\mu \otimes \mu} - \int_{K \times K} f \,\diff\p{\mu_n \otimes \mu_n}}
        &\leq \int_{K \times K} \abs{f  - gh} \,\diff\p{\mu \otimes \mu} + \int_{K \times K} \abs{f  - gh} + \,\diff\p{\mu_n \otimes \mu_n} + \abs{\int_{K \times K} gh \,\diff\p{\mu \otimes \mu} - \int_{K \times K} gh \,\diff\p{\mu_n \otimes \mu_n}} \\
        &\leq \epsilon\mu\p{K}^2 + \epsilon\mu_n\p{K}^2 + \abs{\int_{K \times K} gh \,\diff\p{\mu \otimes \mu} - \int_{K \times K} gh \,\diff\p{\mu_n \otimes \mu_n}} \\
        &\leq 3\epsilon
\end{aligned}
$$

which proves the claim. To complete the proof, observe that $\p{x, y} \mapsto \frac{1}{\abs{x - y}}$ is lower semicontinuous: it is continuous, except when $x = y$, where it is infinity. It is also bounded below by $0$, so there exists a sequence of non-negative continuous functions $\set{f_n}_n$ which increase to it. Thus,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \int_{K \times K} f_N\p{x, y} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{y}
        &= \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_{K \times K} f_N\p{x, y} \,\diff\mu_n\p{x} \,\diff\mu_n\p{y} \\
        &\leq \lim_{n\to\infty} I\p{\mu_n} \\
        &= R_K.
\end{aligned}
$$

By monotone convergence,

$$
I\p{\mu}
    \leq \lim_{N\to\infty} \int_{K \times K} f_N\p{x, y} \,\diff\mu\p{x} \,\diff\mu\p{y}
    \leq R_K.
$$

By definition of $R_K$, $R_K \leq I\p{\mu}$, so these are equalities.

</solution>
