---
topics:
    - change of variables formula
    - conformal mappings
related:
---

<problem>

Let $Q$ be the closed unit square in the complex plane $\C$ and let $R$ be the closed rectangle in $\C$ with vertices $\set{0, 2, i, 2+i}$. Prove that there does _not_ exist a surjective homeomorphism $\func{f}{Q}{R}$ that is conformal on the interior $Q^\itr$ and that maps corners to corners.

</problem>

<solution>

Suppose $\func{f}{Q}{R}$ is such a mapping. Parametrize $\partial{Q}$ counter-clockwise by $\gamma$. Since $f$ is continuous and injective, this means that $f \circ \gamma$ is a simple closed curve. Suppose $\p{f \circ \gamma} \cap R^{\itr} \neq \emptyset$. Then by the Jordan curve theorem, this implies the existence of $w_1$ in the interior region of $f \circ \gamma$ and $w_2$ in the exterior region. But the interior and exterior regions are disconnected, which implies that $f\p{Q^{\itr}}$ is disconnected, which is impossible as it is the continuous image of a connected set. Thus, $f \circ \gamma \subseteq \partial{R}$, and because $f$ maps corners to corners in an injective way, it follows that $f \circ \gamma = \partial{R}$.

Since $f$ is injective, it traverses the vertices of $R$ in a clockwise or counter-clockwise way. By reversing $\gamma$ if necessary, we may assume that $f\p{0} = 0$, $f\p{1} = 2$, $f\p{1 + i} = 2 + i$, and $f\p{i} = i$. For $y \in \br{0, 1}$ consider the segment $C_y = \br{iy, 1 + iy}$ parameterized by $x \mapsto x + iy$. Because of how $f \circ \gamma$ traverses $\partial{R}$, it follows $f\p{iy}$ and $f\p{1 + iy}$ are on the sides of length $1$ of $R$, and it follows that $\diam{f\p{C_\gamma}} \geq 2$. Thus,

$$
\diam{f\p{C_\gamma}}
    = \int_0^1 \abs{f'\p{x + iy}} \,\diff{x} \geq 2.
$$

On the other hand, by Cauchy-Schwarz,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    \int_0^1 \int_0^1 \abs{f'\p{x + iy}} \,\diff{x} \,\diff{y}
        &= \int_Q \abs{f'\p{x + iy}} \,\diff{A} \\
        &\leq \p{\int_Q \abs{f'\p{x + iy}}^2 \,\diff{A}}^{1/2} \p{\int_Q \diff{A}}^{1/2} \\
        &= \p{\int_Q \abs{f'\p{x + iy}}^2 \,\diff{A}}^{1/2} \p{\int_Q \diff{A}}^{1/2}.
\end{aligned}
$$

The Jacobian of $f = u + iv$ as a function $\R^2 \to \R^2$ is given by

$$
\diff{f} =
    \begin{pmatrix}
        u_x & u_y \\
        v_x & v_y
    \end{pmatrix}.
$$

Combined with the Cauchy-Riemann equations, this has determinant

$$
u_xv_y - v_xu_y = \p{u_x}^2 + \p{v_x^2} = \abs{\pder{f}{x}}^2 = \abs{f'}^2.
$$

Thus, by the change of variables formula,

$$
\int_Q \abs{f'\p{x + iy}}^2 \,\diff{A}
    = \int_{f\p{Q}} \,\diff{A}
    = \area{R}.
$$

Thus,

$$
\begin{aligned}
    2
        &\leq \int_0^1 \int_0^1 \abs{f'\p{x + iy}} \,\diff{x} \,\diff{y} \\
        &\leq \p{\area{R}}^{1/2} \p{\area{Q}}^{1/2} \\
        &= \sqrt{2},
\end{aligned}
$$

which is impossible. Thus, no such $f$ exists, which completes the proof.

</solution>
