---
topics:
    - Fatou's lemma
---

<problem>

Let $f\p{x}$ be a non-decreasing function on $\br{0, 1}$. You may assume that $f$ is differentiable almost everywhere.

1. Prove that $\int_0^1 f'\p{x} \,\diff{x} \leq f\p{1} - f\p{0}$.

    _Hint:_ Fatou.

2. Let $\set{f_n}$ be a sequence of non-decreasing functions on the unit interval $\br{0, 1}$, such that the series $F\p{x} = \sum_{n=1}^\infty f_n\p{x}$ converges for all $x \in \br{0, 1}$. Prove that $F'\p{x} = \sum_{n=1}^\infty f_n'\p{x}$ almost everywhere on $\br{0, 1}$.

    _Hint:_ Let $r_n\p{x} = \sum_{k \geq n} f_k\p{x}$. It is enough to show $r_n'\p{x} \to 0$ a.e. Take a subsequence $r_{n_j}$ such that $r_{n_j}\p{1} - r_{n_j}\p{0} \to 0$ and use part (a).

</problem>

<solution>

1. For convenience, we extend $f$ to $f\p{x} = f\p{1}$ for $x \geq 1$. By assumption,

    $$
    f'\p{x} = \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{f\p{x\,+ h} - f\p{x}}{h}
    $$

    for almost every $x$. Hence, by Fatou's lemma and a translation change of variables,

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        \int_0^1 f'\p{x} \,\diff{x}
            &\leq \liminf_{h\to0}\,\int_0^1 \frac{f\p{x + h} - f\p{x}}{h} \,\diff{x} \\
            &= \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{1}{h} \p{\int_0^1 f\p{x + h} \,\diff{x} - \int_0^1 f\p{x} \,\diff{x}} \\
            &= \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{1}{h} \p{\int_h^{1+h} f\p{x} \,\diff{x} - \int_0^1 f\p{x} \,\diff{x}} \\
            &= \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{1}{h} \p{\int_1^{1+h} f\p{x} \,\diff{x} + \int_h^1 f\p{x} \,\diff{x} - \int_0^1 f\p{x} \,\diff{x}} \\
            &= \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{1}{h} \p{\int_1^{1+h} f\p{x} \,\diff{x} - \int_0^h f\p{x} \,\diff{x}} \\
            &\leq \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{1}{h} \p{hf\p{1 + h} - hf\p{0}} \\
            &= \liminf_{h\to0}\,\frac{1}{h} \p{hf\p{1} - hf\p{0}} \\
            &= f\p{1} - f\p{0},
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    as required.

2. Notice that because all the $f_n$ are non-decreasing, it follows that $F$ is non-decreasing as well. Thus, $F$ is differentiable almost everywhere. Similarly, $r_n$ is differentiable almost everywhere as well, for all $n \geq 1$.

    By assumption, $F$ converges everywhere so $r_n\p{x} \to 0$ for all $x \in \br{0, 1}$. We also have

    $$
    \begin{aligned}
        F\p{x}
            &= \sum_{k=1}^n f_k\p{x} + r_n\p{x} \\
        \implies
        F'\p{x}
            &= \sum_{k=1}^n f_k'\p{x} + r_n'\p{x}
    \end{aligned}
    $$

    almost everywhere since all three functions are differentiable almost everywhere. Thus, for almost every $x \in \br{0, 1}$,

    $$
    r_n'\p{x} - r_{n+1}'\p{x} = f_n'\p{x} \geq 0,
    $$

    since $f_n$ is non-decreasing. In other words, $\set{r_n'\p{x}}_n$ and because each $f_n$ is non-decreasing,

    $$
    \sum_{k=n}^m f_n'\p{x} \geq 0\ \forall m \implies r_n'\p{x} \geq 0,
    $$

    so $r_n'\p{x}$ is a monotone decreasing sequence bounded below. Thus, $r_n'$ converges almost everywhere, so we may apply the monotone convergence theorem. Combined with (1), we have

    $$
    \int_0^1 \lim_{n\to\infty} r_n'\p{x} \,\diff{x}
        = \lim_{n\to\infty} \int_0^1 r_n'\p{x} \,\diff{x}
        \leq \lim_{n\to\infty} \p{r_n\p{1} - r_n\p{0}}
        = 0.
    $$

    Since $r_n' \geq 0$, it follows that $\lim_{n\to\infty} r_n'\p{x} = 0$ almost everywhere and so

    $$
    F'\p{x} = \sum_{k=1}^n f_k'\p{x} + r_n'\p{x} \xrightarrow{n\to\infty} \sum_{k=1}^\infty f_k'\p{x},
    $$

    as required.

</solution>
